Music Genre Classification Using the FMA (Free Music Archive)


Problem Statement

Upon pursuing my graduate’s degree, I worked on multiple data mining projects that oriented more towards solving business problems, e.g. customer segmentation, profit prediction, Lifetime Value calculation, etc., utilizing basic machine learning algorithms. These problems were all based on existing simpler datasets with a handful of features and the adoption of basic Machine Learning algorithms. As a student trying to explore the world of more complex, state-of-the-art models, I am really amazed by the accuracy Deep Learning models are able to achieve, along with their stronger ability to work with multimedia content. I look to work on a dataset in either one of the following fields: Natural Language Processing, Computer Vision, and Audio Processing. After discussion with my advisor Gavin, and further narrowing down the candidates based on my interests, I will be working on a very popular problem in recent years: Music Genre Classification.

On top of the high computing power needed to train multimedia datasets, the lack of open licensed music datasets also poses a challenge to the aforementioned task. After thorough research online, I was able to obtain a high quality dataset, FMA (Free Music Archive) with an abundant number of music clips (~100K 30s MP3 files) that could potentially lead to a well-performed model against test sets (a split of the FMA dataset / external sources).
	

Dataset

The dataset and paper can be accessed from: https://github.com/mdeff/fma . I would be using the fma_large dataset (full-sized music library consisting of 30s clips.)
	
The MagnaTagATune (http://mirg.city.ac.uk/codeapps/the-magnatagatune-dataset) could potentially make a good validation set.

Machine Learning Approach
	
This would be a supervised learning problem, as it falls into the category of classification. The dataset(s) used will have genre labels. The other features include song metadata, audio features generated by librosa / extracted from EchoNest, and so forth. Due to the limited amount of user-related features (only number of downloads available) the dataset does not seem a good fit for recommender system construction. I would further discuss with my advisor about the possibility of expanding the project to a content-based recommender system.

As stated, Deep Learning paradigms will be used on the raw music files. As the dataset also comes with rich metadata in the form of pre-extracted features, I will also build a baseline classification model (using KNN / Trees / ...) for performance comparison. I would also attempt to aggregate external labeled datasets with music clips to validate the model performance. 

Final Deliverable

The final deliverable will be a set of Jupyter notebooks that covers the entire Machine Learning pipeline. I would also make a Web app (Django / Node based) that takes in sound clips uploaded by users and returns the genre classification results.
